Lesson 1: What is computational thinking?
==============================

Being able to think is one of the hallmarks of being a human being -
especially meta thinking which involves thinking about your own
thoughts. We often overlook the complexity of thinking because it comes
so naturally to us. It seems so easy because we do it everyday with
little to no thought about how the process works. It only becomes
apparent that it is complex when something or someone interrupts our
thought process e.g. try explaining a specific idea you have to someone
in one or two sentences; or try follow a lecture in a topic you don’t
know anything about. These tasks become difficult because in our daily
life we strip away what we can safely assume to make communication
easier and more effective. This stripping away of “unnecessary”
information becomes a problem when we need it. This is most prominent
when working with computer programming because a computer cannot assume
any information, so you have to provide commands without exception. This
means that you have to adjust your thinking slightly to work through
problems in the same way a computer program would. This isn’t as
daunting as it sounds because it is quite straightforward and it can
also help with the way in which you solve problems outside of
programming too.

The main purpose of computational thinking is to identify problems and
solve them. This seems simple, but problems themselves can be quite
complex and made up of different parts, each of which forms its own
separate problem. The complex nature of problems can make them seem to
be overwhelming, but when you follow a few simple steps, you are able to
break them down into manageable pieces. This is very effective because
not only does it work for computational problems, but it also works for
most problems you will face in life. There are four key steps in this
process: 1) decomposition, 2) pattern recognition, 3) abstraction and 4)
algorithmic thinking. Using these four components, you will be able to
successfully solve problems by “dividing and conquering” them. There are
also some additional factors that need to be considered that are not
directly related to the core way of solving the problem - constraints.
There could be several constraints that you are facing which were
unforeseeable, imposed upon your project or factors that weren’t
considered when starting. In this course, you will learn to use these
four components as well as how to deal with constraints and what you can
do to mitigate the effects of them.

Another point that is important to understand involves the following
three words: what, why and how. It is always important to understand
what you are doing because if you don’t understand that then you cannot
reorientate yourself when you face problems in your project. In the same
way, you need to understand why you are doing something. Keeping a goal
in mind when you break down a problem into smaller pieces will keep you
focused on the big picture even when you are working on the smaller
issues. This is vital for lose losing sight of what your final goal is.
Lastly, having a clear understanding of how you are going to do
something will put an element of realism to a project and reveal any
potential unrealistic expectations right in the beginning. These are
three important components to keep in mind when you are working on any
step of the computational thinking process. They are supplementary
because even though they help keep you on track, you still need the plan
and the action to achieve the goal.

This course will teach you how to effectively use these concepts to
become a self-sufficient learner and problem-solver. Not only in the
computational world, but also in the real world where you are faced with
problems that are much less logical and solutions that are suboptimal at
best. The principles behind both real world and computational problems
are essentially the same, so these lessons are applicable in most - if
not all - domains of study and life. The main point you need to keep in
mind is that the purpose of the exercises isn’t necessarily to achieve
that specific goal, but it’s rather to go through the process so that
you learn the formula to achieve any goal.

The four components of computational thinking
---------------------------------------------

1. Decomposition
----------------

In simple terms, decomposition is the process of breaking down a large
problem into smaller problems. There are a few reasons why this is
helpful in the bigger picture. It gives you insight into the
practicalities associated with solving the problem. You can view the
smaller tasks with more understanding of what needs to be done because
the goal is clearer. This can help you develop actionable steps and get
started on solving them. Image for a moment you moved to a new house and
there is nothing in it yet, but you want to make a cup of coffee after a
day of moving. This seems like a simple enough problem to solve - except
that it isn’t. You are actually dealing with a complex problem because
it’s made up of several problems disguised as one, so the problem
actually seems to be impossible. You cannot make coffee because you
don’t have any of the ingredients in your house. So there are two main
tasks to solve: buy ingredients and make the coffee.

There two tasks can be further broken down into even simpler tasks. When
you buy ingredients, you need to do three things: 
    1. Make of list of ingredients you need.
    2. Decide where you are going to buy them.
    3. Cecide how you are going to get there.

.. note::
    **Make a list of ingredients you need**
        - This can further be divided into separate tasks for each item that you need to buy. You will need milk, water, coffee powder, a kettle, a spoon and a mug.

    **Decide where you are going to them**
        - You can buy all of those items at the supermarket, so you decide to go there.

    **Decide how you are going to get there**
        - The fastest why to the supermarket is by bus, so you decide to take the bus. You also need to make the same trip home after you are done at the supermarket.

2. Pattern recognition
----------------------

When you have broken the problem down into smaller tasks, you can look
for patterns. The first step (the list of ingredients) is made up of
several smaller steps even though it looks like one step. The full step
would actually be as follows: 
    1. Take the bus to the supermarket 
    2. Purchase the milk 
    3. Take the bus back home 
    4. Repeat the process for all the items

This isn’t an efficient way of doing this, so we can look for patterns
in the tasks. The glaringly obvious pattern is that if we buy all the
items at the supermarket then we only have to make one trip to the
supermarket and one trip back home. This is process of pattern
recognition is very useful in using previous knowledge to apply to new
problems. For example, perhaps you are going to a new supermarket
because your regular supermarket is closed for the day. You don’t need
to go through the entire process of planning everything out because you
can use the same pattern as usual, but adjusting a few key points. You
would have to take a different bus and walk an extra few meters to get
to the new supermarket, but buying the ticket, purchasing the items
inside the supermarket and returning home is still the same process. You
have recognized a pattern that you can use for other problems which have
similar characteristics.

3. Abstraction
--------------

The process of abstraction is to discard unnecessary details that are
not relevant to solving the problem. You shouldn’t, in face you cannot,
take everything into account when making a decision, so you filter out
any unnecessary details and focus on what is relevant to the problem you
are solving. In the above example, you take the bus to get to the
supermarket. Is it important that you know every stop on the way to the
bus stop? No. Is it important that you know the model of the bus you are
taking? No. Is it important that you know the bus drivers name?
No. These are all factors that could be relevant to someone else if they
have task that involves those details. For example, if you are a bus
driver and you need to change shifts with a bus driver named John then
it’s important to know the name of the bus driver. So, it’s not
necessarily the case that the details are not important, but rather that
there are details that are not important to your own task.

4. Algorithmic thinking
-----------------------

When you have decomposed the problem, identified any patterns and
filtered out the unnecessary details, you are ready to create a
step-by-step guide on how to solve the actual problems. At this point
you need to make detailed plans for each step. You have to specify
actions in the right order and with sufficient detail, so you can’t just
say “take the bus to the supermarket and come back when you’re done”.
You need to specify the smaller details such as the time you need to
catch the bus, where you need to catch the bus and which number bus you
need to catch. Then you need to specify where to get off, which
direction to take towards the supermarket and how to long walk from the
bus stop. Once you’re in the supermarket, you need to find all the
items, collect them in a basket and pay for them. Then you repeat the
bus process in reverse order making sure to take the bus from the
opposite side of the street.

The relevance of the four components
--------------------------------------

The importance of the four components is to focus your thinking on the
details of the problem, remove any inferences you might have and
realistically show what kind of problem you are dealing with. This may
seem a bit strange with the coffee example, but what is important isn’t
the example itself, but rather the way in which it was broken down and
solved. This forms a blueprint for solving problems and you can use this
blueprint to solve other problems. After doing a simple example, you can
scale up the complexity of the problems until you are able to this for
any problem you face. However, there are other factors to take into
account because after all, the world we live in isn’t a static place, so
things often change.

Constraints
--------------

There are often things that change along the way, so it’s important to
understand that most of the time you will have to work within some
constraints because you hardly ever have the ideal conditions for
carrying out your plan. For example if the supermarket doesn’t have any
coffee in stock then what is the solution for that? You could buy tea
instead or buy some takeout coffee from the restaurant next door. These
aren’t optimal solutions, but they are alternatives to the constraints
that you may face in the real world. What if you find out that the buses
have changed their payment systems and now you need to pay with a
transit card. The only problem is that you’ve never used a transit card
before, so you need to figure out how it works. In this case, the
decomposition of your plan is still valid, but you need to adjust the
algorithmic thinking portion of the four components. You would need to
prioritize getting a bus transit card and loading it with money before
going to the bus stop. This would form a new tasks which takes a higher
priority to the other tasks since you cannot complete any of the other
tasks without first getting the bus transit card.