Lesson 3
====================================

A systematic way to approach computational tasks
================================================

It might still be a bit difficult to find out where to start when
solving a problem, so there is a useful tool that you can use called an
IPO (input, processing and output) table. It’s a simple table where you
have three columns with the previously mentioned names: input,
processing and output. Using an IPO table, we can outline the
print(“Hello World!”) example from earlier.

+-----------------+-------------------------------+--------------------+
| Input           | Processing                    | Output             |
+=================+===============================+====================+
| Words the need  | We will use the print()       | “Hello world!” is  |
| to be displayed | function.                     | displayed on the   |
| on the screen,  |                               | screen             |
| “Hello World!”  |                               |                    |
| in this case.   |                               |                    |
+-----------------+-------------------------------+--------------------+

This is a very simple example, but it’s a good way to breakdown what is
required for the task at hand. In these kinds of simple examples it’s a
little tricky to understand why this would be useful, but in more
complex examples it is very useful to understand exactly what is being
passed as input into the program and what you expect as output. This is
especially true when you have complex programs that rely on the output
of one step to become the input of another one. For example, imagine you
want to wash your clothes, so you create the following steps

**Step 1 - Wash clothes** \| Input \| Processing \| Output \|
\|——-|————|——–\| \|Clothes, washing liquid and washing machine\| Place
clothes in washing machine and start washing \| Wet clothes\|

**Step 2 - Dry clothes** \| Input \| Processing \| Output \|
\|——-|————|——–\| \| Wet clothes and dryer \| Place wet clothes in dryer,
select dryer program and start the process \| Dry clothes

**Step 3 - Fold clothes** \| Input \| Processing \| Output \|
\|——-|————|——–\| \| Laundry basket and dry clothes \| For each item of
clothing, remove it from the basket, fold it and packet away \| Folded
clothes in the cupboard \|

From the above explanation you can see the the output of step 1 and 2
form the input of step 2 and 3 respectively. Step 3 also has laundry
basket, but that’s perfectly fine if you have planned to do that. You
realize, though, when looking through your folded clothes that there is
still a stain on one of your shirts. You go through your IPO table and
you find out that you didn’t actually use the washing liquid, so the
program ran effectively, but it didn’t work as planned. Luckily, because
you have written down your IPO tables, you can easily find the mistake.
IPO tables are a great way to visualize thought processes in a way that
is easy to follow, thus easy to execute. Since you have everything
written down, you can go through the plan to easily find where any
mistakes could’ve been made that would affect the final results.

Exercise 2
----------

Using IPO tables you can easily breakdown a problem into its different
logical steps. In the previous exercise, we’ve learned the simple
solution of printing something to the screen. In this exercise we’re
going to get a bit more complicated, but if you follow the steps laid
out in the beginning (decomposition, pattern recognition, abstraction
and algorithmic thinking) together with IPO tables, you should have at
least some idea of what to do for the next exercise. We discussed that
it’s important to understand why you are doing a task to help you keep
focused on the ultimate goal. However, this is difficult when doing
exercises because the exercise itself has no purpose other than doing
it. So for the sake of of the exercise, I will provide a **why** to your
task. Let’s image you want to find the 10 most common words in a certain
text (in Python text data is called a string). You need to do this
because you are looking for the most common words in a text to make
reading it easier for second language learners. Writing down the 10 most
common words beside the text with their translation will give second
language learners a kick start in understanding the main topic of the
text. However, you want to do this for 100 texts, but you don’t have
time to do it manually. The following steps will help solve this
problem.

**Step 1** \| Input \| Processing \| Output \| \|——-|————|——–\| \|
String \| Assign string to a variable \| variable \|

**Step 2** \| Input \| Processing \| Output \| \|——-|————|——–\| \|
Variable \| Make a list of all the words in the variable by using
split() \| List of words \|

**Step 3** \| Input \| Processing \| Output \| \|——-|————|——–\| \| List
of words \| Count all the words \| List of words together with how many
times they appear in the text (frequency) \|

**Step 4** \| Input \| Processing \| Output \| \|——-|————|——–\| \| List
of words together with how many times they appear in the text
(frequency) \| Sort the words from highest to lowest frequency \| Sorted
list of words \|

**Step 5** \| Input \| Processing \| Output \| \|——-|————|——–\| \|
Sorted list of words \| Print first 10 to the screen \| 10 most common
words \|

As you can see from the above steps, we have broken down the problem
into 5 simple steps that need to be followed. The processing part of
each IPO table is what you need to actually program. So you would need
to figure out how to write code for the following: 1. How to assign a
string to a variable in Python? 2. How to make a list by using split()
in Python? 3. How to count the frequency of words (in a list) in Python?
4. How to sort a list of words in Python? 5. How to display the first 10
items in a list in Python?

There is an easy breakdown of what actually needs to be done. As with
the previous exercise, you probably don’t know what a list is in Python,
but that’s okay because you have the guidelines available to figure it
out. As with the previous exercise, try from number 1 to number 5 and if
you get stuck then search around for answers. I will give three hints
again together with the answer for those who cannot progress, but the
purpose of the exercise is to move step by step through the tasks and
search for those parts you don’t understand.

.. raw:: html

   <details>

.. raw:: html

   <summary>

Exercise 2 hint 1

.. raw:: html

   </summary>

If you are stuck on the first part of the exercise then there are a few
steps that you can take to get started. First, you need to understand
what everything means in the sentence (number 1). The three words that
might prove to be a problem are “assign”, “string” and “variable”. In
Python assign means placing the known value of something (in this case a
body of text which is also called a string) into a variable. The
variable is a word that you create which contains the value of whatever
you assigned to it (in this case the string). Consider the following
examples:

``"This is a test sentence"`` (This is a text or in Python a string)

``sentence`` (This is a variable name - currently this variable has no
value)

``sentence = "This is a test sentence"`` (This is assigning a string to
the variable)

If we go back to the print(“Hello world!”) exercise from before, we can
use the same structure (pattern recognition), but change it a little bit
to prince out the variable. So, we can write ``print(sentence)`` and
this will display the string ``"This is a test sentence"`` which is the
value of the variable. If you remember from previous lessons, we
mentioned that it’s always important to understand why you are doing
something. So, in this case why is it important to assign the value of
the string to the variable? Why can’t we just use the string itself? In
these simple examples, it may not be clear, but if we have an entire
paragraph of text then it’s easier to work with a single word that
refers to that text instead of working with the text every time. This
reduces the chances for mistakes and it is also easier to understand
what is happening in the code you are writing. One of the ultimate goals
of writing code is to be able to be able to look at it a few years from
now and still understand what the intention is of the code.

If you weren’t able to figure out the first sentence on your own and the
above explanation helped you to understand then there is a small
exercise that you can do. Since the purpose of this course is to develop
independent thinking, the real goal isn’t to explain the concepts to
you, but rather to point them out so you can find out what they mean. In
the above case, there is a step-by-step explanation, but you can still
develop independent thinking by looking for verification of this
information. If you search these words do you find the same
explanations? Are the explanations that I gave accurate to your
understanding? Doing this when you get an explanation can still help you
be better at independent thinking and finding answers for yourself -
which is the basis of computational thinking.

.. raw:: html

   </details>

.. raw:: html

   <details>

.. raw:: html

   <summary>

Exercise 2 hint 2

.. raw:: html

   </summary>

Hopefully you have figured out how to assign text to a variable, but in
case you haven’t then it works as follows. Replace the three dots
``...`` with whatever text you are using making sure there are no double
apostrophes in your text. Double apostrophes in Python indicate that
whatever you have between them is text, so if you have double
apostrophes then it will cut your text at that point and probably will
raise an error.

``sentence = "..."``

With your variable called ``sentence`` you now have a reference to the
text that you want to work with. We can take a look at the IPO table we
wrote down for step 2 and see what we need to do with this variable. We
need to get a list of words from the variable, so we need to think of
what that means practically. A word is an element of a sentence which -
in English at least - has the characteristic of a space before and after
the word (this is also referred to as a white space). So, if we can
isolate each individual word and add that to a list then we have a list
of all of the words. Luckily in Python there is a function called
``split`` which takes a string, splits it at whichever character you
specify and returns a list. You need to assign it to a new variable
because if you split the sentence variable without assigning it then it
will just display the list, but not keep it in memory. Here is how you
can do this:

``sentence_words_list = sentence.split()``

There default setting is to split it at each white space, but you can
change that to whichever character you want in case you want to split it
on a different character.

``sentence_words_list = sentence.split(".")`` (this splits it on each
full stop) ``sentence_words_list = sentence.split(". ")`` (this splits
it on each full stop followed by a white space)

Splitting on a full stop followed by a white space is a very quick way
to split into sentences (although not very accurate, since it will miss
question marks, exclamation marks, etc). Very aware that when you
specify a character to split, it must be between apostrophes (double or
single). For this exercise, we only need the default setting of
splitting at the white space, since we need the individual words. After
doing this, we now have a list of words, but it won’t be perfect
i.e. there is still punctuation and capital letters. For now, we don’t
have to worry about that because we want to get everything working
before we evaluate the finer details. One part of writing code that is
beneficial is to build something as quick as possible then make changes
afterwards. The quick version of the code acts as a baseline, so you can
see when you make changes how those changes affect the overall results
of the program.

.. raw:: html

   </details>

.. raw:: html

   <details>

.. raw:: html

   <summary>

Exercise 2 hint 3

.. raw:: html

   </summary>

Now that you have a list of words (let’s call it List A), you can count
how many times they each appear. I’m going to walk through the thought
process of doing this, but I’ll provide an easy way at the end, so read
the whole hint before trying any code. If you think of how this could be
done manually by a person then one way to do it is to make a new list
which we call List B. You would take the first word (let’s call it Word
1) from List A and write it in List B. Then you would look through each
word in List A and when you find Word 1, you add the number 1 next to
Word 1 which is written in List B. Repeat this for all the words and you
will have all the words written once in List B together with how many
times they appear in List A i.e. their frequency. Another way that you
could do this is to create the same two lists, but when you go through
List A, you can update List B with each word. This would mean writing
Word 1 in List B then move on to Word 2. Check if Word 2 is in List B.
If it is in List B then you add one to it’s count. If it’s not in List B
then you write it in List B with a count of 1. Repeat this until you get
to the end of List A. Both of these methods would work for counting the
words and there are probably other methods that you could figure out.

However, we are not trying to get the quickest method for counting the
words or comparing different methods for counting words. We simply need
a way to count the words, so we can move on to the next step of our main
task. Like we discussed earlier, don’t get caught up in the finer
details and forget what the main goal is. The ideal situation would be a
single line of code that could count the words in a list and return that
as a list. After all, if someone has already done the work then it saves
us time and it prevents us from reinventing something that already
exists. Luckily for us, there is a module called ``collections`` that
has a function called ``Counter`` which does just what we are looking
for. Using the list we created in the previous exercise, we can count
the words in 1 line of code (after importing the module of course).

::

   from collection import Counter
   sentence_words_list_counted = Counter(sentence_words_list)

Now there is a slight challenge here that you can try solve before
moving on to the next hint. ``sentence_words_list_counted`` is not
actually a list, but it’s a Counter object. How can you work with
Counter objects?

.. raw:: html

   </details>

.. raw:: html

   <details>

.. raw:: html

   <summary>

Exercise 2 hint 4 (solution)

.. raw:: html

   </summary>

At this point, if you’ve managed to do the exercise using the Counter
object then it’s quite simple to finish the rest of the steps and output
the top 10 words. All you need to do is is the following:

``print(sentence_words_list_counted.most_common())``

This will display the most common words together with their frequencies,
however, if we want to get only the 10 most frequent words then we can
simply specify that as an argument as follow. If you don’t know what an
argument is then search “what is an argument in Python?” and see if you
can figure out which part of the following code is the argument.

``print(sentence_words_list_counted.most_common(10))``

In case you couldn’t figure out what the argument was, it’s the 10 in
the above example. The argument in a Python function is whatever is
between the parentheses. For example, in the above case there are
actually two functions:

1. ``print()``
2. ``sentence_words_list_counted.most_common()``

In the case print (function 1), the argument is
``sentence_words_list_counted.most_common()`` (function 2) and the
argument of function 2 is 10. You can pass any whole number in function
2 as an argument as long as it’s smaller then the number of words in the
list. If we had to write what it’s doing into plain English is would be
as follows: ``most_common()`` displays all the words in
``sentence_words_list_counted``, but as a list and not a Counter object.
If you add an argument (in this case 10) then it displays only the top
10.

Using the Counter module is a quick and easy way to solve the problem,
but if we wanted to sort the list ourselves, how could we do that? We
know that ``sentence_words_list_counted.most_common()`` without any
arguments gives us the list of words with their frequencies. Let’s
create a new variable and assign that list to the new variable.

``top_10_words = sentence_words_list_counted.most_common()``

``top_10_words`` is a normal Python list that contains where each
element is a tuple (if you don’t know what a tuple is then search “what
is a tuple in Python?” to find out). The first part of the tuple is the
word and the second part of the tuple is the frequency of the word. If
we take a step back and think about sorting again, there are a few ways
we could sort a list like this: by the frequencies, alphabetically by
the words, and we can do that from biggest to smallest (descending) or
some smallest to biggest (ascending) order. The following code will
display the list sorted in alphabetical order.

``print(sorted(top_10_words, lambda x: x[0]))``

The next code will sort and display the code in reverse alphabetical
order

``print(sorted(top_10_words, lambda x: x[0], reverse=True))``

So, we have the following results: 1. Sorted from biggest to smallest by
frequency: ``print(sorted(top_10_words, lambda x: x[0]))`` 2. Sorted
from smallest to biggest by frequency: ? 3. Sorted alphabetically:
``print(sorted(top_10_words, lambda x: x[0]))`` 4. Sorted reverse
alphabetically:
``print(sorted(top_10_words, lambda x: x[0], reverse=True))``

Can you figure out number 2 (sorted from smallest to biggest by
frequency)?

.. raw:: html

   </details>

Exercise 2 review
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This exercise was quite a lot of work to solve a simple tasks of
displaying the top 10 words, but there are many benefits and most of the
work done for this tasks can be reused literally or conceptually. You
can literally reuse the text in case you need to find the top 10 words
of another text or maybe expand that to find the top 100 words in
multiple texts. In those cases, you just need to replace the current
text in this piece of code with the new text you are working with. In
terms of conceptually reusing the code, this links back to the four
components of computational thinking we discussed in the beginning.
Steps 1-5 that we have laid out above is an example of **algorithmic
thinking** because it lays out the solution in a step-by-step way that
is easy to follow. You can reuse this concept to solve other problems
that are similar to it which refers to recognizing the patterns by which
the problem was solved - this is **pattern recognition**.

Looking back on how we managed to solve to problem is a good way to
understand the process as a whole, remember the key points and also find
ways in which we could have done it better. Code can always be more
efficient and effective, and problems can always be solved in different
ways. So, it’s important to review what solutions you have produced so
that later on you can apply them to other problems. This might make more
work in the beginning, but it will be worth the work later on. The more
you create solutions and adapt them to solve other problems, the easier
it becomes. The easier it becomes to do this, the quicker, more
efficient and more accurate you will be able to do it.

One last point to consider from this exercise is that not everything was
explained. Sometimes, you came across words and concepts that you didn’t
understand. This was intentionally done because when you are faced with
a real-world problem which you have to solve, you usually won’t have a
starting point explained to you, since you are the one who has to solve
the problem. So, it’s imperative to learn how to find the answers to
things you don’t understand without the need for someone to explain it
to you. A lot of the time you will have someone to help you or explain
it to you, but in the cases where you don’t have that person, you need
to be at least come up with an idea to find the answer.

.. raw:: html

   </details>
